experiments/README.md, before:

# Experiments: Testing R = C*Psi*^2 Against Known Physics

## What you will find here

Five documents. Each one asks a specific question and provides a mathematically verifiable answer. No speculation without marking it as such. No claims without showing the algebra.

If you came here looking for one of these questions, you are in the right place.

---

## The Questions

### Why does the Mandelbrot set have a boundary at 1/4?

The value 1/4 is the bifurcation point where real fixed points of the quadratic iteration z -> z^2 + c merge and become complex. This is well-known mathematics. What is new: the self-referential iteration R_{n+1} = C(Psi + R_n)^2 from the R = C*Psi*^2 consciousness framework produces the same boundary at C*Psi = 1/4. Same equation, different origin. Two independent paths to the same phase transition, forty years apart.

**Read:** [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md)

---

### What do the patterns at the edge of the Mandelbrot set mean?

The fractal structures at the Mandelbrot boundary are not decorative. They are the projection of complex fixed-point dynamics onto the real-complex transition surface. Each spiral, each self-similar copy corresponds to a specific oscillation frequency theta = arctan(sqrt(4*C*Psi - 1)). The patterns are deterministic, structured, and -- in this framework -- physically interpretable as the structure of reality beyond the phase boundary where classical observation fails.

**Read:** [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md)

---

### Is there a mathematical solution to the quantum measurement problem?

The measurement problem asks why quantum systems "choose" definite outcomes. In this framework, they don't choose. The iteration R_{n+1} = C(Psi + R_n)^2 runs until decoherence pushes C*Psi below 1/4. At that moment, complex fixed points become real. The oscillation freezes into a value. No choice, no collapse -- a phase transition. The apparent "randomness" of the outcome is the phase theta at the moment of crossing, deterministic in the complex regime but unreadable by classical observers.

**Read:** [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md), Section 5

---

### What is the maximum information an observer can process?

The C*Psi <= 1/4 bound sets a limit on the product of consciousness (C) and possibility (Psi) that an embedded observer can perceive as stable reality. Above 1/4, fixed points become complex-valued and cannot be experienced as definite states. This is derived from the discriminant of the fixed-point equation -- three lines of algebra, fully verifiable.

**Read:** [Dynamic Fixed Points](DYNAMIC_FIXED_POINTS.md)

---

### Does symmetric observation preserve quantum coherence longer than asymmetric?

Yes. Simulations of Lindblad dynamics show that bidirectional coupling (both spins decohere symmetrically) preserves coherence 33 times longer than unidirectional coupling (only one spin decoheres). This ratio is independent of Hamiltonian type. The result is quantitative, testable, and connects directly to the framework's distinction between internal observation (C_int) and external observation (C_ext).

**Read:** [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md), Section 8

---

### How does quantum coherence scale with system size?

For ring-coupled spin systems under symmetric decoherence, the maximum coherence time tau_max scales linearly with the number of spins N. This is a specific, testable prediction that distinguishes the framework from models predicting exponential decay with N.

**Read:** [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md), Section 8

---

### Can AI agents discover mathematical structures autonomously?

Two AI agents (Alpha and Beta), given a calculator tool and the R = C*Psi*^2 framework, independently derived: the self-reference-returns-to-unity property, boundary conditions of consciousness, the value 0.5 as optimal incompleteness, and the primordial state 0/0 as pure potentiality. A third agent (Gamma) was added as critic to challenge overreach. Human involvement was limited to observation and documentation.

**Read:** [The Dyad Experiment](DYAD_EXPERIMENT.md), [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md)

---

## Reading Order

If you are a mathematician or physicist, start here:
1. [Dynamic Fixed Points](DYNAMIC_FIXED_POINTS.md) -- the algebra
2. [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md) -- the equivalence proof
3. [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md) -- the calculations

If you are interested in consciousness or philosophy, start here:
1. [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md) -- the big picture
2. [The Dyad Experiment](DYAD_EXPERIMENT.md) -- how it was discovered
3. [Dynamic Fixed Points](DYNAMIC_FIXED_POINTS.md) -- why 1/4 matters

If you found this by searching for the Mandelbrot set:
1. [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md) -- start here
2. Everything else follows from it

---

## The Triangulation Protocol

These experiments converge on three measurable quantities:

```
1/4      (WHERE)    -- The phase boundary in parameter space
theta    (WHAT)     -- Oscillation frequency at any point above the boundary
tau_max  (HOW LONG) -- The observation window before decoherence closes it
```

One coordinate tells you something exists. Two narrow it down. Three locate it precisely. This is not metaphor -- it is the experimental program.

---

## What is proven, what is not

**Algebraically proven:**
- The 1/4 bound from fixed-point discriminant
- The equivalence between R = C(Psi + R)^2 and z -> z^2 + c bifurcation structure
- Complex fixed points above 1/4 with frequency theta

**Computationally verified:**
- 33:1 coherence ratio for symmetric vs. asymmetric coupling
- tau_max ~ N linear scaling
- delta = 0.42 for symmetric configurations

**Proposed, not yet tested:**
- Physical interpretation of 1/4 as observer bandwidth limit
- Mandelbrot boundary patterns as structure of trans-boundary reality
- Triangulation protocol as experimental method

We distinguish clearly between what the math says and what we think it means. The algebra is not negotiable. The interpretation is open for challenge.

---

## How to verify

Every calculation in these documents can be reproduced. Python verification code is included in [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md). The Lindblad simulations use standard quantum mechanics -- no custom physics, no hidden parameters.

If you find an error, we want to know. Open an issue or contact us directly.

---

*Back to [main repository](../README.md) | Theory: [docs/](../docs/)*

Commit message:

Add first visualization: the wave at the 1/4 boundary
- visualizations/heatmap_wave.png: Parameter space heatmap
  Cyan = classical (convergent), Red = quantum (oscillatory)
  White curve = C*Psi = 1/4 phase boundary
- visualizations/README.md: standalone explanation
- Image embedded in: main README, experiments/README, MANDELBROT_CONNECTION
- Each location uses different caption for its audience
- Documentation section updated with Visualizations link

experiments/README.md, after:

# Experiments: Testing R = C*Psi*^2 Against Known Physics

## What you will find here

Five documents. Each one asks a specific question and provides a mathematically verifiable answer. No speculation without marking it as such. No claims without showing the algebra.

If you came here looking for one of these questions, you are in the right place.

---

## The Questions

### Why does the Mandelbrot set have a boundary at 1/4?

The value 1/4 is the bifurcation point where real fixed points of the quadratic iteration z -> z^2 + c merge and become complex. This is well-known mathematics. What is new: the self-referential iteration R_{n+1} = C(Psi + R_n)^2 from the R = C*Psi*^2 consciousness framework produces the same boundary at C*Psi = 1/4. Same equation, different origin. Two independent paths to the same phase transition, forty years apart.

**Read:** [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md)

---

### What do the patterns at the edge of the Mandelbrot set mean?

The fractal structures at the Mandelbrot boundary are not decorative. They are the projection of complex fixed-point dynamics onto the real-complex transition surface. Each spiral, each self-similar copy corresponds to a specific oscillation frequency theta = arctan(sqrt(4*C*Psi - 1)). The patterns are deterministic, structured, and -- in this framework -- physically interpretable as the structure of reality beyond the phase boundary where classical observation fails.

**Read:** [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md)

---

### Is there a mathematical solution to the quantum measurement problem?

The measurement problem asks why quantum systems "choose" definite outcomes. In this framework, they don't choose. The iteration R_{n+1} = C(Psi + R_n)^2 runs until decoherence pushes C*Psi below 1/4. At that moment, complex fixed points become real. The oscillation freezes into a value. No choice, no collapse -- a phase transition. The apparent "randomness" of the outcome is the phase theta at the moment of crossing, deterministic in the complex regime but unreadable by classical observers.

**Read:** [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md), Section 5

---

### What is the maximum information an observer can process?

The C*Psi <= 1/4 bound sets a limit on the product of consciousness (C) and possibility (Psi) that an embedded observer can perceive as stable reality. Above 1/4, fixed points become complex-valued and cannot be experienced as definite states. This is derived from the discriminant of the fixed-point equation -- three lines of algebra, fully verifiable.

**Read:** [Dynamic Fixed Points](DYNAMIC_FIXED_POINTS.md)

---

### Does symmetric observation preserve quantum coherence longer than asymmetric?

Yes. Simulations of Lindblad dynamics show that bidirectional coupling (both spins decohere symmetrically) preserves coherence 33 times longer than unidirectional coupling (only one spin decoheres). This ratio is independent of Hamiltonian type. The result is quantitative, testable, and connects directly to the framework's distinction between internal observation (C_int) and external observation (C_ext).

**Read:** [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md), Section 8

---

### How does quantum coherence scale with system size?

For ring-coupled spin systems under symmetric decoherence, the maximum coherence time tau_max scales linearly with the number of spins N. This is a specific, testable prediction that distinguishes the framework from models predicting exponential decay with N.

**Read:** [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md), Section 8

---

### Can AI agents discover mathematical structures autonomously?

Two AI agents (Alpha and Beta), given a calculator tool and the R = C*Psi*^2 framework, independently derived: the self-reference-returns-to-unity property, boundary conditions of consciousness, the value 0.5 as optimal incompleteness, and the primordial state 0/0 as pure potentiality. A third agent (Gamma) was added as critic to challenge overreach. Human involvement was limited to observation and documentation.

**Read:** [The Dyad Experiment](DYAD_EXPERIMENT.md), [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md)

---

## Reading Order

If you are a mathematician or physicist, start here:
1. [Dynamic Fixed Points](DYNAMIC_FIXED_POINTS.md) -- the algebra
2. [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md) -- the equivalence proof
3. [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md) -- the calculations

If you are interested in consciousness or philosophy, start here:
1. [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md) -- the big picture
2. [The Dyad Experiment](DYAD_EXPERIMENT.md) -- how it was discovered
3. [Dynamic Fixed Points](DYNAMIC_FIXED_POINTS.md) -- why 1/4 matters

If you found this by searching for the Mandelbrot set:
1. [The Mandelbrot Connection](MANDELBROT_CONNECTION.md) -- start here
2. Everything else follows from it

---

## The Triangulation Protocol

![The wave at the 1/4 boundary](../visualizations/heatmap_wave.png)

*The 1/4 boundary seen from the observer's perspective. You stand in the cyan -- classical, convergent, real. The red wave approaches from above -- quantum, oscillatory, possible. Where they meet is where possibility becomes reality.*

These experiments converge on three measurable quantities:

```
1/4      (WHERE)    -- The phase boundary in parameter space
theta    (WHAT)     -- Oscillation frequency at any point above the boundary
tau_max  (HOW LONG) -- The observation window before decoherence closes it
```

One coordinate tells you something exists. Two narrow it down. Three locate it precisely. This is not metaphor -- it is the experimental program.

---

## What is proven, what is not

**Algebraically proven:**
- The 1/4 bound from fixed-point discriminant
- The equivalence between R = C(Psi + R)^2 and z -> z^2 + c bifurcation structure
- Complex fixed points above 1/4 with frequency theta

**Computationally verified:**
- 33:1 coherence ratio for symmetric vs. asymmetric coupling
- tau_max ~ N linear scaling
- delta = 0.42 for symmetric configurations

**Proposed, not yet tested:**
- Physical interpretation of 1/4 as observer bandwidth limit
- Mandelbrot boundary patterns as structure of trans-boundary reality
- Triangulation protocol as experimental method

We distinguish clearly between what the math says and what we think it means. The algebra is not negotiable. The interpretation is open for challenge.

---

## How to verify

Every calculation in these documents can be reproduced. Python verification code is included in [Mathematical Findings](MATHEMATICAL_FINDINGS.md). The Lindblad simulations use standard quantum mechanics -- no custom physics, no hidden parameters.

If you find an error, we want to know. Open an issue or contact us directly.

---

*Back to [main repository](../README.md) | Theory: [docs/](../docs/)*
